README.md, before:

# Auto-heal Service

This project contains the _auto-heal_ service. It receives alert notifications
from the Prometheus alert manager and executes Ansible playbooks to resolve the
root cause.

## Configuration

Most of the configuration of the auto-heal service is kept in a YAML
configuration file. The name of the configuration file is specified using the
`--config-file` command line option. If this option isn't explicitly given then
the service will try to load the `autoheal.yml` file from the current working
directory.

In addition to the configuration file the auto-heal service also uses command
line options to configure the connection to the Kubernetes API and the log
level. Use the `-h` option to get a complete list of these command line options.

The `--kubeconfig` command line option is used to specify the location of the
Kubernetes client configuration file. When running outside of a Kubernetes
cluster the auto-heal service will use `$HOME/.kube/config` by default, the same
used by the `kubectl` command. When running inside a Kubernetes cluster it will
use the configuration that Kubernetes mounts automatically in the pod file
system. So in most cases this command line option won't have to be explicitly
included.

The `--logtostderr` option is very convenient when running the auto-heal
service, both in development and production environments.

Assuming that you want to have your own `my.yml` configuration file a typical
command line will be the following:

```bash
$ autoheal server --config-file=my.yml --logtostderr
```

See the `autoheal.yml` file for a complete example.

### AWX or AnsibleTower configuration

The first section of the configuration file is named `awx` and it contains all
the details needed to connect to the [AWX](https://www.ansible.com/products/awx-project)
or [Ansible Tower](https://www.ansible.com/products/tower) server:

```yaml
awx:
  address: https://myawx.example.com/api
  proxy: http://myproxy.example.com:3128
  credentialsRef:
    namespace: my-namespace
    name: my-awx-credentials
  tlsRef:
    namespace: my-namespace
    name: my-awx-ca
  project: "Auto-heal"
```

The `address` parameter is the URL of the API of the AWX server. It should
contain the `/api` suffix, but not the `/v1` or `/v2` suffix, as the auto-heal
service will internally decide which version to use.

The `proxy` parameter is optional, and it indicates what HTTP proxy should be
used to connect to the AWX API. If this parameter is not specified, or if it is
empty, then the connection will be direct to the AWX server, without a proxy.

The `credentialsRef` parameter is a reference to the [Kubernetes
secret](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret) that contains
the user name and password used to connect to the AWX API. That secret should
contain the `username` and `password` keys. For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  namespace: my-namespace
  name: my-awx-credentials
data:
  username: YWxlcnQtaGVhbGVy
  password: ...
```

Alternatively it is also possible to specify the user name and password directly
inside the configuration file, using the `credentials` section. For example:

```yaml
credentials:
  username: autoheal
  password: ...
```

This is very convenient for development environments, but it is not recommended
for production environments, as then the configuration file needs to be
protected very carefully. For example, you can create a separate file for the
credentials, give it restricted permissions, and then load it using the
`--config-file` option twice:

```
$ echo > general.yml <<.
awx:
  address: https://myawx.example.com/api
.
$ echo > credentials.yml <<.
credentials:
  username: "autoheal"
  password: "..."
.
$ chmod u=r,g=,o= credentials.yml
$ autoheal server --config-file=general.yml --config-file=credentials.yml

```

The `tlsRef` parameter is a reference to the [Kubernetes
secret](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret) that contains
the certificates used to connect to the AWX API. That secret should contain the
`ca.crt` key, for example:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  namespace: my-namespace
  name: my-awx-tls
data:
  ca.crt: |-
    LS0tLS1CRUdJTiBDRVJUSUZJQ0FURS0tLS0tCk1JSUMvVENDQWVXZ0F3SUJBZ0lKQUxNRXB6OWxa
    VkVzdzI3Sm5BYlMyejNhbUF0YTc1QmNnVGcvOUFCdDV0VVc2VTJOKzkKbXc9PQotLS0tLUVORCBD
    ...
```

Alternatively it is also possible to specify the CA certificates directly inside
the configuration file, using the `tls` section. For example:

```yaml
tls:
  caCerts: |-
    -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
    MIIFgzCCA2ugAwIBAgIPXZONMGc2yAYdGsdUhGkHMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBCwUAMDsx
    CzAJBgNVBAYTAkVTMREwDwYDVQQKDAhGTk1ULVJDTTEZMBcGA1UECwwQQUMgUkFJ
    ...
    -----END CERTIFICATE-----
```

They can also be specified indirectly, putting the name of a PEM file in the
`caFile` parameter:

```yaml
tls:
  caFile: /etc/autoheal/my-ca.pem
```

The `insecure` parameter controls whether to use an insecure connection to the
AWX server. If the connection is insecure then the TLS will not be verified. It
should always be set to `false` (the default) in production environments.

The `project` parameter is the name of the AWX project that contains the job
templates that will be used to run the playbooks.

### Throttling configuration

The `throttling` section of the configuration describes how to throttle the
execution of healing actions. This is intended to prevent _healing storms_ that
could happen if the same alerts are send repeatedly to the service.

The `interval` parameter controls the time that the service will remember an
executed healing action. If an action is triggered more than once in the given
interval it will be executed only the first time. The rest of the times it will
be logged and ignored. (see `autoheal.yml` for an example.)

The default interval value is one hour. Leaving the `interval` parameter 0
will *disable* throttling altogether.

Note that for throttling purposes actions are considered the same if they
have exactly the same fields with exactly the same values *after* processing
them as templates. For example, an action defined like this:

```yaml
awxJob:
  template: "Restart {{ $labels.service }}"
```

Will have different values for the `template` field if the triggering alerts
have different `service` labels.

The auto-heal service performs a periodic job status check against AWX server,
to check the status of the active jobs that were triggered.
The `jobStatusCheckInterval` parameter determines how often to perform this check.
It is optional, and the defult is '5m' (every 5 minutes).

### Healing rules configuration

The second important section of the configuration file is `rules`. It contains
the list of _healing rules_ used by the auto-heal service to decide which action
to run for each received alert. For example:

```yaml
rules:

- metadata:
    name: start-node
  labels:
    alertname: "NodeDown"
  awxJob:
    template: "Start node"
    extraVars: |-
      {
        "node": "{{ $labels.instance }}"
      }

- metadata:
    name: start-service
  labels:
    alertname: ".*Down"
    service: ".*"
  awxJob:
    template: "Start service"
```

The above example contains two _healing rules_. The first rule will be
executed when the alert received contains a label named `alertname` with
a value that matches the regular expression `NodeDown`.

The second rule will be executed when the alert received contains a
labels `alertname` *and* `service`, matching the regular expressions
`.*Down` and `.*` respectively.

The `metadata` parameter of each rule is used to specify the `name` of
the rule, which is used by the auto-heal service to reference it in log
messages and in metrics.

The `labels` and `annotations` parameters of a rule are maps of strings
used to specify the labels and annotations that the alerts should
contain in order to match the rule. The keys of these maps are the names
of the labels or annotations. The values of these maps are regular
expressions that the values of those labels or annotations should match.

The `awxJob` parameter indicates which job template should be executed
when an alert matches the rule.

The `template` parameter is the name of the AWX job template.

The `extraVars` parameter is optional, and if specified it is used to
pass additional variables to the playbook, like with the `--extra-vars`
option of the `ansible-playbook` command.

> Note that in order to be able to use this `extraVars` mechanism the
> AWX job template should have the _Prompt on lauch_ box checked,
> otherwise the variables passed will be ignored.

The values of all the parameters inside `awxJob` are processed as [Go
templates](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template) before executing the
job. These templates receive the details of the alert inside the
`$labels` and `$annotations` variables. For example, to generate
dynamically the name of the job templates to execute from the value of
the `template` annotation of the alert:

```yaml
awxJob:
  template: "{{ $annotations.template }}"
```

Or to pass a variable `node` to the playbook, calculated from the
`instance` label:

```yaml
awxJob:
  template: "My template"
  extraVars: |-
    {
      "node": "{{ $labels.node }}"
    }
```

### Alertmanager Configuration

Follow the upstream [Prometheus Alertmanager documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/)
to configure alerts.

For reference, here is an example Alertmanager configuration that sends
an alert to the auto-heal service with authentication. This example assumes
autoheal and the Alertmanager are running on the same OpenShift cluster,
and requires Alertmanager 0.15 or newer.

```yaml
global:
  resolve_timeout: 1m

route:
  group_wait: 1s
  group_interval: 1s
  repeat_interval: 5m
  receiver: autoheal
  routes:
  - match:
      alertname: DeadMansSwitch
    repeat_interval: 5m
    receiver: autoheal 
receivers:
- name: default
- name: deadmansswitch
- name: autoheal
  webhook_configs:
  - url: https://autoheal.openshift-autoheal.svc/alerts
    http_config:
      bearer_token_file: /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token
      ca_file: /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/service-ca.crt
```

When using the cluster-monitoring-operator, save the configuration as
`alertmanager.yaml` and use this command to apply it:

```oc create secret generic alertmanager-main \
   --namespace=openshift-monitoring \
   --from-literal=alertmanager.yaml="$(< alertmanager.yaml)" \
   --dry-run -oyaml \
   | \
   oc replace secret \
   --namespace=openshift-monitoring \
   --filename=-
```



## Building

To build the binary run this command:

```
$ make
```

To build the RPM and the images, run this command:

```
$ make build-images
```

## Testing

To run the automated tests of the project run this command:

```
$ make check
```

To manually test the service, without having to have a running Prometheus alert
manager that generates the alert notifications, you can use the `*-alert.json`
files that are inside the `examples` directory. For example, to simulate the
`NodeDown` alert start the server and then use [curl](https://curl.haxx.se) to
send the alert notification:

```
$ autoheal server --config-file=my.yml --logtostderr
$ curl --data @examples/node-down-alert.json http://localhost:9099/alerts
```

## Installing

To install the service to an _OpenShift_ cluster use the template contained in
the `template.yml` file. This template requires at the very minimum the address
and the credentials to connect to the AWX or Ansible Tower server. See the
`template.sh` script for an example of how to use it.

## Development

If needed for development, we can run the server without an OpenShift cluster,
simulating OpenShift's alert manager using curl commands.

In the examples dir we have examples of firing alerts, and a configuration file
that does not require a connection to a working OpenShift cluster.

To run autoheal in dev mode (without a running OpenShift cluster) developers
can use the dev config file in the examples dir.

To simulate alerts firing, developers can use the example alerts.

```
$ make build
$ make run-dev
```

```
$ curl --data @examples/node-down-alert.json http://localhost:9099/alerts
```

When developing features that does not require AWX server, developers can use
a mock-awx server from the examples dir. The mock server will listen on port
8080.

```
$ cd examples/mock-awx
$ go run mock-awx.go
```

Commit message:

Use Ansible role to install
Currently the suggested way to install the auto-heal service is to use
the `template.sh` script, which in turn uses the `template.yml`
_OpenShift_ template to create the required objects. This isn't as
flexible as we may need in the future. For example, if we eventually add
an API server we will need to add role bindings to the `kube-system`
namespace. That isn't possible using _OpenShift_ templates because the
`namespace` field is ignored and replaced with the namespace of the
template itself. To address that issue, and to make the suggested way to
install closer to what will be (eventuall) used in the _OpenShift_
installer this patch adds an Ansible role and an ansible playbook to do
the installation. So the installation will now have the following steps:

1. Modify the `install.ini` file to add the minimum set of required
parameters, for example:

```
$ cat >> install.ini <<.
openshift_autoheal_awx_address="https://tower.private/api"
openshift_autoheal_awx_password="EPyZ8Mzw/QeplQ"
.
```

2. Run the `install.sh` script:

```
$ ./install.sh
```

Signed-off-by: Juan Hernandez <jhernand@redhat.com>

README.md, after:

# Auto-heal Service

This project contains the _auto-heal_ service. It receives alert notifications
from the Prometheus alert manager and executes Ansible playbooks to resolve the
root cause.

## Configuration

Most of the configuration of the auto-heal service is kept in a YAML
configuration file. The name of the configuration file is specified using the
`--config-file` command line option. If this option isn't explicitly given then
the service will try to load the `autoheal.yml` file from the current working
directory.

In addition to the configuration file the auto-heal service also uses command
line options to configure the connection to the Kubernetes API and the log
level. Use the `-h` option to get a complete list of these command line options.

The `--kubeconfig` command line option is used to specify the location of the
Kubernetes client configuration file. When running outside of a Kubernetes
cluster the auto-heal service will use `$HOME/.kube/config` by default, the same
used by the `kubectl` command. When running inside a Kubernetes cluster it will
use the configuration that Kubernetes mounts automatically in the pod file
system. So in most cases this command line option won't have to be explicitly
included.

The `--logtostderr` option is very convenient when running the auto-heal
service, both in development and production environments.

Assuming that you want to have your own `my.yml` configuration file a typical
command line will be the following:

```bash
$ autoheal server --config-file=my.yml --logtostderr
```

See the `autoheal.yml` file for a complete example.

### AWX or AnsibleTower configuration

The first section of the configuration file is named `awx` and it contains all
the details needed to connect to the [AWX](https://www.ansible.com/products/awx-project)
or [Ansible Tower](https://www.ansible.com/products/tower) server:

```yaml
awx:
  address: https://myawx.example.com/api
  proxy: http://myproxy.example.com:3128
  credentialsRef:
    namespace: my-namespace
    name: my-awx-credentials
  tlsRef:
    namespace: my-namespace
    name: my-awx-ca
  project: "Auto-heal"
```

The `address` parameter is the URL of the API of the AWX server. It should
contain the `/api` suffix, but not the `/v1` or `/v2` suffix, as the auto-heal
service will internally decide which version to use.

The `proxy` parameter is optional, and it indicates what HTTP proxy should be
used to connect to the AWX API. If this parameter is not specified, or if it is
empty, then the connection will be direct to the AWX server, without a proxy.

The `credentialsRef` parameter is a reference to the [Kubernetes
secret](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret) that contains
the user name and password used to connect to the AWX API. That secret should
contain the `username` and `password` keys. For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  namespace: my-namespace
  name: my-awx-credentials
data:
  username: YWxlcnQtaGVhbGVy
  password: ...
```

Alternatively it is also possible to specify the user name and password directly
inside the configuration file, using the `credentials` section. For example:

```yaml
credentials:
  username: autoheal
  password: ...
```

This is very convenient for development environments, but it is not recommended
for production environments, as then the configuration file needs to be
protected very carefully. For example, you can create a separate file for the
credentials, give it restricted permissions, and then load it using the
`--config-file` option twice:

```
$ echo > general.yml <<.
awx:
  address: https://myawx.example.com/api
.
$ echo > credentials.yml <<.
credentials:
  username: "autoheal"
  password: "..."
.
$ chmod u=r,g=,o= credentials.yml
$ autoheal server --config-file=general.yml --config-file=credentials.yml

```

The `tlsRef` parameter is a reference to the [Kubernetes
secret](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret) that contains
the certificates used to connect to the AWX API. That secret should contain the
`ca.crt` key, for example:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  namespace: my-namespace
  name: my-awx-tls
data:
  ca.crt: |-
    LS0tLS1CRUdJTiBDRVJUSUZJQ0FURS0tLS0tCk1JSUMvVENDQWVXZ0F3SUJBZ0lKQUxNRXB6OWxa
    VkVzdzI3Sm5BYlMyejNhbUF0YTc1QmNnVGcvOUFCdDV0VVc2VTJOKzkKbXc9PQotLS0tLUVORCBD
    ...
```

Alternatively it is also possible to specify the CA certificates directly inside
the configuration file, using the `tls` section. For example:

```yaml
tls:
  caCerts: |-
    -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
    MIIFgzCCA2ugAwIBAgIPXZONMGc2yAYdGsdUhGkHMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBCwUAMDsx
    CzAJBgNVBAYTAkVTMREwDwYDVQQKDAhGTk1ULVJDTTEZMBcGA1UECwwQQUMgUkFJ
    ...
    -----END CERTIFICATE-----
```

They can also be specified indirectly, putting the name of a PEM file in the
`caFile` parameter:

```yaml
tls:
  caFile: /etc/autoheal/my-ca.pem
```

The `insecure` parameter controls whether to use an insecure connection to the
AWX server. If the connection is insecure then the TLS will not be verified. It
should always be set to `false` (the default) in production environments.

The `project` parameter is the name of the AWX project that contains the job
templates that will be used to run the playbooks.

### Throttling configuration

The `throttling` section of the configuration describes how to throttle the
execution of healing actions. This is intended to prevent _healing storms_ that
could happen if the same alerts are send repeatedly to the service.

The `interval` parameter controls the time that the service will remember an
executed healing action. If an action is triggered more than once in the given
interval it will be executed only the first time. The rest of the times it will
be logged and ignored. (see `autoheal.yml` for an example.)

The default interval value is one hour. Leaving the `interval` parameter 0
will *disable* throttling altogether.

Note that for throttling purposes actions are considered the same if they
have exactly the same fields with exactly the same values *after* processing
them as templates. For example, an action defined like this:

```yaml
awxJob:
  template: "Restart {{ $labels.service }}"
```

Will have different values for the `template` field if the triggering alerts
have different `service` labels.

The auto-heal service performs a periodic job status check against AWX server,
to check the status of the active jobs that were triggered.
The `jobStatusCheckInterval` parameter determines how often to perform this check.
It is optional, and the defult is '5m' (every 5 minutes).

### Healing rules configuration

The second important section of the configuration file is `rules`. It contains
the list of _healing rules_ used by the auto-heal service to decide which action
to run for each received alert. For example:

```yaml
rules:

- metadata:
    name: start-node
  labels:
    alertname: "NodeDown"
  awxJob:
    template: "Start node"
    extraVars: |-
      {
        "node": "{{ $labels.instance }}"
      }

- metadata:
    name: start-service
  labels:
    alertname: ".*Down"
    service: ".*"
  awxJob:
    template: "Start service"
```

The above example contains two _healing rules_. The first rule will be
executed when the alert received contains a label named `alertname` with
a value that matches the regular expression `NodeDown`.

The second rule will be executed when the alert received contains a
labels `alertname` *and* `service`, matching the regular expressions
`.*Down` and `.*` respectively.

The `metadata` parameter of each rule is used to specify the `name` of
the rule, which is used by the auto-heal service to reference it in log
messages and in metrics.

The `labels` and `annotations` parameters of a rule are maps of strings
used to specify the labels and annotations that the alerts should
contain in order to match the rule. The keys of these maps are the names
of the labels or annotations. The values of these maps are regular
expressions that the values of those labels or annotations should match.

The `awxJob` parameter indicates which job template should be executed
when an alert matches the rule.

The `template` parameter is the name of the AWX job template.

The `extraVars` parameter is optional, and if specified it is used to
pass additional variables to the playbook, like with the `--extra-vars`
option of the `ansible-playbook` command.

> Note that in order to be able to use this `extraVars` mechanism the
> AWX job template should have the _Prompt on lauch_ box checked,
> otherwise the variables passed will be ignored.

The values of all the parameters inside `awxJob` are processed as [Go
templates](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template) before executing the
job. These templates receive the details of the alert inside the
`$labels` and `$annotations` variables. For example, to generate
dynamically the name of the job templates to execute from the value of
the `template` annotation of the alert:

```yaml
awxJob:
  template: "{{ $annotations.template }}"
```

Or to pass a variable `node` to the playbook, calculated from the
`instance` label:

```yaml
awxJob:
  template: "My template"
  extraVars: |-
    {
      "node": "{{ $labels.node }}"
    }
```

### Alertmanager Configuration

Follow the upstream [Prometheus Alertmanager documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/)
to configure alerts.

For reference, here is an example Alertmanager configuration that sends
an alert to the auto-heal service with authentication. This example assumes
autoheal and the Alertmanager are running on the same OpenShift cluster,
and requires Alertmanager 0.15 or newer.

```yaml
global:
  resolve_timeout: 1m

route:
  group_wait: 1s
  group_interval: 1s
  repeat_interval: 5m
  receiver: autoheal
  routes:
  - match:
      alertname: DeadMansSwitch
    repeat_interval: 5m
    receiver: autoheal 
receivers:
- name: default
- name: deadmansswitch
- name: autoheal
  webhook_configs:
  - url: https://autoheal.openshift-autoheal.svc/alerts
    http_config:
      bearer_token_file: /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token
      ca_file: /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/service-ca.crt
```

When using the cluster-monitoring-operator, save the configuration as
`alertmanager.yaml` and use this command to apply it:

```oc create secret generic alertmanager-main \
   --namespace=openshift-monitoring \
   --from-literal=alertmanager.yaml="$(< alertmanager.yaml)" \
   --dry-run -oyaml \
   | \
   oc replace secret \
   --namespace=openshift-monitoring \
   --filename=-
```



## Building

To build the binary run this command:

```
$ make
```

To build the RPM and the images, run this command:

```
$ make build-images
```

## Testing

To run the automated tests of the project run this command:

```
$ make check
```

To manually test the service, without having to have a running Prometheus alert
manager that generates the alert notifications, you can use the `*-alert.json`
files that are inside the `examples` directory. For example, to simulate the
`NodeDown` alert start the server and then use [curl](https://curl.haxx.se) to
send the alert notification:

```
$ autoheal server --config-file=my.yml --logtostderr
$ curl --data @examples/node-down-alert.json http://localhost:9099/alerts
```

## Installing

To install the service to an _OpenShift_ cluster use the Ansible role contained
in the `role` directory. This role requires at the very minimum the address and
the credentials to connect to the AWX or Ansible Tower server, which should go in the
`inventory.ini` file. So add your settings to that file:

```


. See the
`install.sh` script for an example of how to use it.

## Development

If needed for development, we can run the server without an OpenShift cluster,
simulating OpenShift's alert manager using curl commands.

In the examples dir we have examples of firing alerts, and a configuration file
that does not require a connection to a working OpenShift cluster.

To run autoheal in dev mode (without a running OpenShift cluster) developers
can use the dev config file in the examples dir.

To simulate alerts firing, developers can use the example alerts.

```
$ make build
$ make run-dev
```

```
$ curl --data @examples/node-down-alert.json http://localhost:9099/alerts
```

When developing features that does not require AWX server, developers can use
a mock-awx server from the examples dir. The mock server will listen on port
8080.

```
$ cd examples/mock-awx
$ go run mock-awx.go
```
